Hello and welcome. I'm Michelle Hussein
and this show is a place where every
weekend you can hear one essential
conversation. I hope it provides some
insight into the ideas and the people
shaping our world. Now, when the Brexit
vote happened nearly 10 years ago, you
might have thought it was the career
peak for those who had defined
themselves by campaigning for the UK to
leave the European Union. Now it seems
for Nigel Farage, it was the beginning
of something else, something bigger. The
leader of Reform UK is my guest this
weekend. His party only has a few
members elected to parliament. But in
recent months, it's been ahead in the
opinion polls, ahead of both the parties
that have dominated British governments
for a century. Which is why people are
starting to ask, could he be prime
minister? What would that look like? An
election isn't due in the UK for another
four years, but Nigel Farage has been
good at spotting political
undercurrents, and he's at a transition
point. Can he maintain this level of
support? Can he capitalize on his links
to the American right and import an
American political playbook?
This conversation is not our first. I've
interviewed him a number of times over
the years and he's known for his
combative manner with journalists.
Listen, love is what he says to me at
one point in this. Overall, what I
wanted to know is who is Nigel Faraj?
Can he be a leader for the whole
country?
>> Welcome Nigel Farage. How are you? All
right. Yes. But I mean, life is busy.
>> Well, I want to start with a sense of
the moment actually because I'm
conscious that you are in the midst of a
remarkable few months where your party
has been leading in the opinion polls in
a sustained way, which is why if there
was an election today, and we don't
really have that kind of system in the
UK, but if there was an election today,
you'd be you you look likely to become
prime minister.
>> Election tomorrow, we'd win easily. But
the trouble is it's a marathon to the
next election. We've hit the 13 mile
mark and we're a mile ahead. So, it's a
good thing we've done what we've done,
but there's a long way to go.
>> Well, but also on you personally, the
idea of being prime minister,
>> are you properly adjusted to this idea?
Because most people see you, this is
what you're known for, campaigner,
disruptor, someone who brings change
from the outside. Actually leading for
the whole country is a very different
thing.
>> Yeah, that's the point. We now need
change from the inside. We've not had
enough change. We are atrophying as a as
a country. We're declining economically.
We're declining society. We're declining
culturally. Um, people are leaving.
We're in real real trouble. So, we now
need we now need a disruptor. Not from
the outside to change perceptions, but
from the inside to actually change
things. Am I ready for it? Yes.
>> You've only been an MP for a year. So,
I've been in politics for 30 years. I
was in the European Parliament for over
two decades. I led a group in the
European Parliament for over 10 years.
I've got a lot more experience than Kia
Stalmer or many of the other prime
ministers we've had in the recent
period.
>> Political experience, but I but not
governing experience. You never been
part of You did once say that you you
did once say that you couldn't imagine
having a seat around the cabinet table
that it was not something that attracted
you.
>> Do you know what? The rank, the title,
the position doesn't interest me at all.
Doesn't interest me in the least. I
couldn't care less about it. What
interests me is what you can do with it.
And there are fundamentally two types of
people in politics. Those who want to be
something, those who want to do
something. And I've always been a person
that's wanted to do something. In the
past, what I've done is help change
public opinion, help shift national
debate. I'm now moving that on to the
next logical stage.
>> Yeah. But I I still wonder about the
kind of work that in that is involved in
delivering for a country as the prime
minister. It involves sitting there with
the red boxes going through the official
government papers.
>> What do you mean I've been doing for the
last 25 years? Building I've been you
haven't been going through civil service
papers every day. It is different.
>> The only living human being in this
country who has built political
movements on a table like this with a
telephone, a piece of paper and a
pencil. I can build things. I can do
things. My track record says that.
>> Okay. So, you're ready for it. It is the
job that you want to do.
>> Yes. I mean look it's it's clearly an
enormous job and the scale of the
problems that we face uh the
institutional barriers that'll get put
before us. I you know I do understand
all of that. I tell you what if we don't
do this then by 2035
I shudder to think what this country
genuinely what this country will be
like. So we have to do this.
>> But would you govern for all? Because
you're not known as someone who brings
people together. You're known as someone
who chooses their issues. campaigns very
hard on them who's often predicted and
made the political weather. But you're
not a unifier. Doesn't a prime minister
have to be that?
>> Well, I think we've had too many
unifiers and look and look where
consensus politics has got us. Look at
the mess it's got us.
>> So, you would govern as a decisive
figure.
>> You'd govern you'd govern as a majority
government. You'd govern on a radical
manifesto that says the country needs
fundamental reform. And of course, some
people won't like it, but that's the way
it is.
>> Okay. Well, we'll talk about the ways
that you would reform. It is the name of
your party, but it's also what you want
to do, and we'll talk about that in a
moment. But I want to go back in time
first of all, because you're recording
with us here in our studios in the heart
of the city of London, a place you know
well.
>> Absolutely.
>> You used to be a commodities trader, a
metals trader. You worked on the
doorstep right around here.
>> How formative was that experience to who
you are today?
>> Yeah, my father was a stockbroker for
over half a century. My grandfather was
a stockbroker for over half a century.
So a lot of our family had worked in
fact on both sides in the city. Um I was
here in the 80s. I was here in that
transformative period where let's be
frank what was a bit of an old boy club
through big bang became an international
global center
>> deregulation the city in its heyday if
you like
>> opening up um innovative
>> thatcher's time.
>> It was thatcher's time. Yeah it was.
>> And you were a Thatcherite.
>> Oh absolutely. I mean back then I was
but I mean you know bear in mind we're
talking 40 years ago. Uh there were
there were a different set of economic
problems. We didn't have the social
problems in that time that we've gotten
now. That that that's one aspect of life
that's worse. So I was here when Yeah. I
mean kind of by the middle late 80s. I
mean it was the most exciting incredible
and fun place to be.
>> We did have social problems though. A
lot of people got a lot of people got
left behind in that period and some of
them are supporting your party today. We
had
>> there were mining communities
industrialization there were mining
communities who had a very bleak time.
Uh they by the way had an even bleaker
time in John Major's years when we
unnecessarily
>> closed pits. But what I mean is we were
all British. There was a much bigger
sense of togetherness despite the
economic division than there is in the
country today. And this has been a theme
of what you've been saying. Essentially,
you you you look on migration as the
source of all the country's ills.
>> Well, that's a ridiculous thing to say,
but
>> well, you you just pointed that we were
we were more British in the in the
period you're looking at.
>> We have all sorts of problems. We have
massive economic problems now, uh
falling GDP per capita being perhaps top
of the list, although very rarely talked
about in Westminster. No, the social
problems we Yes, there were divisions
then. You're absolutely right. But the
social problems that we face today are
worse. Look, I think about the city was,
you know, I can remember when the phone
rang that it occasionally was Paris,
occasionally was Frankfurt, but much
more likely to be Singapore or Santiago.
This was a global trading center, and I
couldn't understand.
>> The city of London is still a global
trading center,
>> uh, far less than it was. And I couldn't
understand the political obsession with
our next door neighbors that the little
backyard market called Europe. Um, oh
yes, it's a big market blah blah blah,
but it's 15% of global GDP. So really,
when I saw the single European act
coming in in ' 86, I what are we doing?
Um, and then I saw the British
establishment preparing for us to join
the euro. 1990 we joined the exchange
rate mechanism
>> and then had to crash out of it two
years later because pegging to the
Deutsch mark which I predicted. Yep. I
predicted it the very night we joined. I
was in a bar just over there saying this
will never ever work. Um and this is
what really got me into politics. I
couldn't understand what I saw in my
day-to-day life here and what I saw
government doing were two very different
things.
So it was there's a direct link then
between Brexit and your work in the city
here in the 1980s and and 1990s. You
came here at the age of 18 actually
straight out of school. When you look at
Brexit today and what has happened in
the last 9 years and I you you say that
it's a poorer country today than it was.
Do you think it was worth having the
referendum in 2016?
>> Do I think freedom's worth it? Yes,
absolutely. Do I think self-governance
is governance is worth it? Yes. Of
course I do. Do I think the ability to
control your borders is worth having?
Yes, I do. Now, have we exercised it?
No.
>> But that's why I asked the question, was
it worth having it in 2016? The vote
given what we know now. Sterling has
never recovered its value. Business
investment which was rising has not has
stalled since that.
>> No, I mean look, you know, even as K
Star himself says, the deep-seated
economic problems within the country
predate Brexit, even predate the
pandemic. and our response to it. You
know, our productivity problems being
perhaps just one very very good example.
I am angry that a conservative
government with a whopping great
majority didn't take advantage of it.
>> And you think you could have done better
if you were prime minister?
>> Mars better. Mars better. And and I hate
to see what's happening in the city.
>> So then if you were prime minister and I
can ask you this question because the
way the polls are looking right now. So
today, if you became prime minister,
would you rip up the treaty, the
agreement that Kama made with the EU
earlier this year?
>> Well, the whole treaty is up for
renegotiation anyway. Um, it's a very
poor treaty. We can do a lot better than
that. We'll have to play hard ball. Uh,
if you play hard ball, you have to mean
it. That's the art of
>> I've heard this before.
>> Uh, well, yeah, but from whom?
>> Well, I've heard this before from Okay.
From conservatives, not from people in
your party, but from people who believed
in Brexit. They didn't believe in it.
They never believed it. They never they
never believed in it. Let's just go
back. They belatedly they belatedly
accepted Brexit because if they hadn't,
they would have faced political
extinction.
>> So if Brexit has never been done
properly, you as prime minister would
reshape our relationship with the EU.
>> What do you mean? If Brexit hadn't had
the reason I'm here,
>> no, I mean if you were prime minister,
what would you do with the current
alignment that we have with the EU on
many areas? Well, look, we've been weak
as hell. We've given in. We've given in.
We've given in. We've expected favors in
return. We haven't got any. It needs a
tough renegotiation. And ultimately,
even though we've got huge economic
problems, they've got some pretty
serious problems, too. In fact, the
French have an even bigger not just not
just uh economic, but constitutional
crisis as well. Uh yeah, giving away our
fish for the next 12 years. Things like
that. Completely outrageous, total
betrayal of what people voted for. But
the focus the focus
and yes trade with Europe is important
of course it is
>> but the real focus has to be what's
happening internally within the UK
economy.
>> So
you would rip up the K star agreement
with the EU. I think you're saying it
needs it needs a rethink. Okay. But all
Star has done all Star has done is make
concessions in return that means you
would be taking an economic risk right
now and that's and and you have been
known all your life for taking risks
right it's in your book
>> everything in life's about risk life is
about you pride yourself on being a
gambler can I read these
entrepreneurship about risk
>> I love a gamble I love stacking up the
odds and it's only been through taking
enormous risks that the party and I have
got to where we are today is that the
kind of prime minister you would be a
risk-taking prime minister
>> we need far more risk-taking and by the
way much more broadly the prime minister
We need to encourage risk takingaking in
the economy.
>> You take a risk with the relationship
with the with the nearest
neighbor, the big geography that puts
this big market on our you take a risk
with that in the in the interest of a
>> bad relationship. You have to take risks
to reshape it.
>> So how would you reshape it? You'd end
alignment. Is that what you're saying?
>> Alignment's catastrophic.
>> So you'd end it
>> catastrophic. Uh moronic. you'd end
alignment with the EU if you
>> is sending us is keeping us firmly
hooked back in the 20th century, not in
the 21st. It makes no sense at all from
any angle.
>> Is that a yes to the question I've
asked? You would end alignment with the
>> EU%
plus.
>> Okay. Um, so this is the point. So
you're still a risk taker. You were in
your years as a trader in the city and
you're still going to govern in that way
if you elected prime minister.
I know you had two really traumatic
experiences as a very young man. You
were hit by a car and you ended up
spending two months in hospital and you
were then diagnosed with testicular
cancer when you're in your in your early
20s. There's another, and I know you
said that this is part of why you you
decided you needed to do things with
your life, but there's a there's a
different way that that story could have
gone, which is that you conserve your
energy and you prioritize your family
and you think of all that's that's close
to you. Instead, you had two failed
marriages and
>> it's called living. You went,
>> it's called living
>> and you campaigned around the country.
>> Look, I could be a boring so and so like
most people in politics. I'm not. I've
lived. I've had some huge successes.
I've had some massive failures. I'm 61.
I've got a vast experience of life. I've
seen the good times. I've seen the bad
times. I've seen success. I've seen
failure. I think that makes me better
qualified to be a leader than those that
have lived steady, what I might describe
as boring lives.
>> So, what have been your big failures?
>> Well, I've made mistakes personally,
obviously. Um, I've made I mean I've
made I've had successes too, but I've
made mistakes financially. And look,
I've lived the big I've lived the Big
Dipper of life, but I've in the end been
very lucky. I'm still here. I'm still
alive despite a couple of goes at not
being. Um, I think that's given me a
couple of things. Uh, number one, a
pretty rounded life. And number two, I'm
not actually frightened of anything. And
that I think and that I think
is a very very valuable asset given what
I may well be facing in two or three
years time.
>> So let's talk about your political
instincts then.
>> Can you take those headphones because I
want to play you something that you said
at CPAC the big conservative political
conference earlier on this year. You've
been close to the American right for a
long time. So you go to these
conferences and this is what you said in
February 2025.
Suddenly, post November the 5th, America
is optimistic. It's upbeat. It's the
beginning of a golden age in America.
>> Have you seen me down there?
>> That's not all of it.
>> Oh gosh. Sorry. Listening.
>> In fact, in many ways, what we're
fighting for is a very similar agenda to
the one that you've just fought for and
the one that you have just succeeded
with.
You're going to make America great
again. and we in turn will make Britain
great again. Thank you.
>> Well, well, hang on. I've got Wait,
listen, wait for my question, which is
that
>> you use these words, make Britain great
again. And I know that you have a sense
of history and I know the past is
important to you.
>> And fun and fun.
>> Sense of fun.
>> Sense of fun. Yeah. Say make Britain
great again to an American audience
who've just elected a president on Make
America Great Again is quite fun.
>> So, you didn't mean it.
>> Of course, I meant it, but you know,
>> that's what I understand what what you
mean by it because you have got a sense
of history. I know your grandparents a
lot about the past.
>> Your grandfather had been wounded in the
first world war.
>> True.
>> What story did they tell you about
Britain's past? What is it that you
think of when you think of when Britain
>> We had a stable society.
We had belief,
things that bound us perhaps religion
being one of them. And by the way,
government can't force people to
believe. But there was a shared sense of
religion.
>> Are you a man of faith?
>> Community? Yes. I mean, I'm I have to
say struggling a bit.
>> Do you go to church?
>> Well, of course. I mean, I'm an
Anglican. It's been a catastrophe for 25
years. Um,
>> what the Church of England?
>> Oh, terrible. Absolutely awful.
>> So, you believe you believe, but there's
no church that you feel like attending.
>> Well, if I was a more regular church go,
I probably would have defected to the
Catholics.
>> I probably would have done. I haven't. I
haven't. I have thought about it a
couple of times. No, I think a sense of
community, a sense of family. I mean
frankly, you know, the values around the
meaning of family, community, country,
those things were much stronger in years
that have gone by.
>> Which years? Which is the decade you're
looking at? That's what I'm curious
about when you say the words
when Britain was great. What is in your
mind? Which is the decade?
>> Britain was great imperially. Britain
was great industrially. Britain was
great in terms of innovation. uh Britain
was great in terms actually in many ways
I think of of taking some very good
things the large parts of the world
Britain was great in leaving behind some
amazing legacies Australia
>> those I'm wondering about what period
when you when you look to the past are
you thinking about the 1980s and the
period you were in the city or are you
thinking about the first world war
>> I think really what we did I think
really what we did since 1688 I think we
were actually fortunate to have our
civil war
>> but we're not going to go back to the 17
I'm just giving I've just given
as a political leader when you think of
>> when you want Britain to go back to
because you want to make Britain great
again. What are you looking to as a
model?
>> I don't want Britain to go back
anywhere. I want Britain to go forwards.
And that's really the point and it's one
of the reasons why, you know, I've been
very critical of the government of the
Bank of England, very critical of much
of our economic policy. I think we are
stuck in a rut. I think we're stuck with
an old outofouch globalist mindset about
so many things. No, no, no, no. You can
respect your traditions. You can respect
your past. You can have a a sense and a
feeling of what history is. I'm not
going back anywhere. I want to go I want
us to be in the 21st century. We're not
there. We're literally But here we are
sitting. I mean, I can see St. Paul's as
I'm talking to you. We're in the middle
of the city of London. We have a
revolution going on. economic a money
revolution going on with digital assets,
cryptocurrency. It's real. It's growing
very, very quickly. And what's happening
here? Nothing. Literally nothing. And I
think these are these are untested ideas
in government, aren't they? I know you
were talking the other day about wanting
to have a national cryptocurrency
reserve.
>> I'm really sorry. We don't know what
that looks like.
>> No, because we're years and years behind
the rest of the world. Go to Miami. You
know, go to Miami. fly to Miami tonight
and you tomorrow morning can go out and
buy everything from a Starbucks coffee
to a Ferrari with a card that you've
loaded up from an ATM in the street with
Bitcoin, Ethereum or other currencies
and and the world is changing and we're
not changing. So if you think the bank
of
>> and if you think about it just one one
more point think about it actually we
have been great innovators you know
whether it's the industrial revolution
whether it's the nuclear energy industry
which we led the world in just just a
few decades ago we're very very
inventive we're very creative we're
naturally a very entrepreneurial country
I think we I I just believe we've lost a
sense of all of that
>> so the bank of England if you think
they're so out of step with where their
focus should be in your view. Would you
revoke their independence as prime
minister?
>> Well, I think the big I mean the bigger
mistake was taking away banking
regulation from them from an
organization that had been doing it
since 1694.
Gave it to a bunch of tickbox
bureaucrats down in Canary Warf.
>> Do you mean the financial conduct of So
would you disband that?
>> They are useless.
>> They are utterly useless. We did a
complete
>> Would you do away with We did a radical
rethinking of what they are, what
they're for, who they serve, what their
purpose is.
>> Isn't the truth though? You I mean, you
don't really It's not a question of who
does the regulation. I think you
instinctively don't like regulation or
regulation. You see it as a hindrance.
>> No, and other people might see it as the
things that protect us from from
wrongdoing.
>> Actually, you're wrong. Actually, you're
wrong. You're wrong because my argument
with crypto, with digital assets, is we
need a regulated market. Again, you go
back there then to the medieval times.
It was all about having some b a basic
framework of rules that consumers and
market users can trust. So, I'm not
against regulation. I'm not a complete,
you know, lazy fair merchant, but you
have to get that balance right.
>> But I think you are saying as prime
minister, you are signaling that you'd
be prepared to do away with the
financial conduct authority. You would
give them those powers back to the Bank
of England.
>> I think we need a complete radical
rethink. Yes. on many of these things
and the FCA has been a total failure.
>> Would you sack Andrew Bailey as governor
of the Bank of England?
>> I was debunked. You know, I was
debanked. I was rejected by 10 other
banks. I was literally being frozen out
of the financial system to the point I
might have had to leave the country,
which indeed is what they wanted.
>> And that became [clears throat] a big
issue. And luckily, you got your
accounts back.
>> Well, luckily I'm big enough and ugly
enough to fight my own corner. But there
are thousands of people out there who've
been debanked because of excessive rules
on anti-moneylaundering directives or
whatever else it may be who've got no
voice for themselves.
>> And what about the governor of the Bank
of England, Andrew?
>> Well, he's a nice enough bloke, but
>> can he would he keep his job if you were
president?
>> Well, he's had [clears throat] a good
run. We might find someone new.
>> Really?
>> He's had a good run.
>> So, you are signaling you'd be
>> I'm not signaling. I'm just saying
>> this is shades of President Trump and
the Federal Reserve.
>> If Andrew Bailey wants to get with the
21st century and by the way there's one
encouraging thing because I went to see
him last month. He just put a limit on
the number of stable coins any
individual can hold. I said, "Andrew,
this this is ridiculous. This is
dinosaur like." And within a week he
changed it. So maybe he was listening.
But the Bank of England, the British
government, the regulator, whatever
shape that takes, they've all got to
understand the world is changing, has
changed very, very rapidly.
>> Okay? So the world has changed, not just
the financial world, the world more
broadly. And if you were prime minister,
you'd have to have opinions and take
advice and formulate policy on a whole
host of areas which you're not known for
talking about,
>> such as
>> social care, how you'd fill vacancies in
the social care sector, but and national
security. And there are people in the
political establishment, Labour figures,
conservative figures, including Boris
Johnson, who think that you and your
party are soft on Russia.
>> Oh, poor old Boris. I feel sorry for
him, really. Um I guess if you failed
that much you have to lash out at
somebody. Look I mean this but I mean
this is of course politics and
narratives isn't it? You know just
because
14 year 13 years ago. I said in an
interview I thought Putin was a very
effective political operator but not a
nice human being. Suddenly you're a
Putin supporter. Funny enough the year
after I said that the queen met him
whether she was seen to be a
collaborator I don't know. I think it's
more the accusations come from the fact
that you've said things in the past like
you think n you know what I'm going to
say you you've suggested that NATO
provoked Putin into invading Ukraine
>> the endless eastward expansion of NATO
and the European Union and Kissinger
warned about this years ago. We
shouldn't have done it but that's in the
past. We did it. Putin's invaded. I was
really hoping that Trump could bring
Putin to heal and that some kind of
compromise could be struck as it's just
been recently struck with Gaza and and
Israel. Clearly that is not going to
happen. Obviously Putin is a very bad
dude. Simple.
>> Why hasn't President Trump put more
pressure on him?
>> Oh, he's putting huge pressure on he's
putting pressure on India. He's putting
pressure on and I think
>> what about Putin himself? Um, I think
Trump feels that Putin has made a fool
of him and clearly Putin is not a
rational man. He wants to come to a
logical deal. So the idea that I'm soft
on this is just nonsense.
>> Well, what what put fire under the
accusations was very recently when the
former leader of your party in Wales
pleaded guilty to eight counts of
bribery, taking money from someone
described as a porn of the Russian
secret services.
>> Appalling. Appalling. And he will go to
prison for a long time. At least I hope
he does. But you know what?
>> He was the leader of your party in
Wales. But hang on. He's been he's been
on he's been involved with UKIP, your
former party. He was involved with
Brexit, the Brexit party, your former
party with He's been at your side.
>> I've known him for I've known him for 25
years. He was unbelievably, you perhaps
don't know this, a bishop in the Mormon
church. I mean, god-fearing
to a level I've almost never met. I've
been so uncorrupted I thought he
wouldn't even drink coffee and there he
was taking money to ask questions.
Appalling.
>> Well, is it just one bad apple? That's
what I want without any shadow of a
doubt.
>> You can assure voters that there is no
one else like Nathan Gil in reforms
ranks?
>> I I if if there if I even suspected it,
they wouldn't be let through the door.
>> And you're sure that no no one else has
taken money from those Russian sources?
>> Sure. My mother's not a mass murderer?
>> There's nothing as sure as that. You
know, I mean, how can you be sure of
anything in life? Well,
>> you know, the question itself is a
stupid question. The question itself is
a stupid question. You know that and I
know that. I believe 100% with all my
heart there's nobody else.
>> Um, can I just quickly then understand
your instincts on Russia a bit more
fully with a few scenarios? So, if you
were prime minister and NATO jets uh
entered Russian jets entered NATO
airspace, where do you stand on that? Do
you think they should be
>> got to shoot them now?
>> No questions. Whatever that does,
however much that inflames tensions,
Russia needs to be taught a lesson.
>> Listen, love, you're trying ever so
hard. I'm the only person in the world,
I think, that stood up in the European
Parliament in 2014, and do you know what
I said? There will be a war in Ukraine.
It's coming. I'm the only person that
got it right. I might have made one
comment once 13 years ago that said, "I
admired him as a political operator, but
not as a human being, and I'd never live
in Russia." Period.
>> Okay. frozen assets. Russian frozen
assets should be used to to help.
>> You can go on as long as you like. I've
made the position perfectly clear.
>> No. What's the answer to that? They
would be frozen. They're in Belgium.
>> So, they should be they should be used.
>> You better ask the Belgian government.
But clearly, if they're there through
illegal means, they should be.
>> So, your instincts is as British prime
minister.
>> My instinct is I think Putin's a really
bad bloke and you can and you can sit me
here for an hour, you're going to get
nowhere.
>> You'd put British troops on the ground
in postwar Ukraine after a ceasefire.
Uh, I'd be very cautious about doing
that. Might put a UN force. Might think
about a Korean approach to it. Would I
put the British army badge badged as a
British army? Be deeply deeply
thoughtful about
>> because you'd be worried about them
being a target for the Russians.
>> I'd be deeply thoughtful about doing
that and it wouldn't be a clever thing
to
>> you see exactly that kind of thing is
what gives hearing something caveat is
what you're gourage.
>> You are quite right. I'm not a
wararmonger. Rather like President
Trump, I'm not a wararmonger. Those that
went before have been persistent
wararmongers. I'm not. I happen to think
that what the UN did in Korea was
remarkable
and still over 70 years on has held and
South Korea has become just I mean the
most incredible country which by the way
does things far better than we do in
terms of building nuclear energy and
much else. That would be the right way
to go forward.
>> Okay. So let's talk about areas then
where your agenda, as you said in that
clip we heard a moment ago, where your
agenda is similar to the Trump
administrations, for example, on
migration. Yeah.
>> Both your party and President Trump's
Republicans feel very strongly about
that.
>> What he's done is amazing.
>> So would you want ICE style raids taking
place here to deport the 600,000 people
in five years you want to deport? I
think it's really I think what I think
now see this again you know I I was with
Tom Hman who was his border zar a few
weeks ago to try and find out what's
really going on in America. It's really
interesting
border crossings are down 97%.
Trump came to power but the interesting
thing is about deportations.
So they have a thousand ICE squads out
around America knocking on doors saying
you're here illegally.
and you've got two choices. Number one,
you can go, we'll fund your return.
We'll give you a few dollars. We'll say
to you that you can legally, if you
want, apply for a skills visa in the
years to come to come back to America.
And if we think you're going to be a
productive member of the economy and of
society, we'll let you in.
>> Is that what you want? the the the ICE
the ICE raids are done by masked armed
men who jump out of vehicles, grab
people in your media narrative. I've
just told you what's happening and what
is really interesting
>> they do have masks, don't they? And guns
and they do go into work as I mean I
would hope actually if they didn't have
guns they'd be mad. Um
>> so would you want that here? That's
really because this interview is about
what you would do as prime minister.
>> Do you know how do you know how many
people have voluntarily left America in
8 months?
1.6 million. It is truly remarkable. 1.6
million people have peacefully
with incentives not just to leave but
potential.
>> I want to understand
>> but potential.
>> What lessons you're taking for the UK
from
>> what I'm learning is if you do things
well and do things properly, it can be
highly effective.
>> So is that a yes to ICE style raids in
the UK?
>> It's look, we're not America. We'll do
it our way, not the American way.
>> So what is does our way involve the
army? Our way will involve border force
doing the job that they would so
desperately like to do.
>> That's the job they do now.
>> How how would it be different? Would you
use the army?
>> No. At the moment, border force are a
taxi service and they hate it.
>> So would you use the army?
>> They absolutely
hate doing what they're doing, which is
why so many people resign.
>> Sad.
>> Saving people essentially at in the
channel and bringing them to shore.
>> You may say,
>> is that what you mean by the No, that's
what I mean. I think that's what you're
referring to when you say taxi service.
French Navy, bring them across. French
Navy, bring them across. Escort them all
the way. Border force bring them pick
them up. Bring them in. They chuck their
passports in the sea. They chuck their
phones in the sea. And we're supposed to
just put up with it. Well, you know,
>> what's really important is to understand
how because the numbers you've said you
would deport are really significant.
600,000 over 5 years. Which is why I'm
interested in the methods. Look, I think
the truth is that most people who were
caught, who are in Britain illegally, if
we do it nicely and do it properly, will
accept they have to go.
>> It's about 9,000 a year currently. And
to meet your target, you'd be increasing
that by 10 times. Do you think you can?
>> I think we can. You know, of course,
theory, reality, being in government, I
get all of that. I understand all of
that. Uh, is it doable? Yes. But but but
there is a very important message here.
very I mean in most countries in the
world if you enter illegally you are
chucked in prison literally in a
majority of countries in the world
illegal entry means immediate
imprisonment
>> is that what you do people would arrive
and they would be put in prison
immediately detained
>> well that's that's what you I didn't say
it you said it fine
>> you said it you said it that's fine I'm
not playing games I'm not playing games
people would be detained and deported
dead simple
>> in prison
>> there are plenty of exmilitary bases if
we can keep them. But the point, look,
you know, it's very interesting.
Australia had all this in 2012. They
stopped it within a fortnight. Within a
fortnight, no one came illegally. You
know why? They were towed back to
Indonesia. It can be done. It's about
political will. It's about being tough
for a short period of time. It can be
done. It can be done.
>> Uh you've got a a big pledge also to cut
significant amounts of government waste.
I know you're rethinking your economic
plans, but there is a figure.
>> Not the broad principles. Not the broad
print. Well, what about the amount? So,
it says in this from last
[clears throat] year that you would cut
waste by the tune government waste to
say 50 billion pounds a year. Is that
still
>> Yeah, that was about
>> that's still the plan.
>> That was about Yeah, actually we
probably go further than that. I mean,
>> you get more than more than 50 billion.
>> I mean, you know, Malay and Argentina
has shown that you can do it, but you
have to work out doing it what the cost
of that is.
>> Elon Musk discovered that he couldn't
cut nearly as much as he hoped to.
Initially, he said$2 trillion. I mean to
be fair we had to have that and then it
went
>> to be fair Malay has. To be fair Malay
has but look we're test betting this in
the in the local councils that we won
last May where we've cut about half a
billion so far. You know it's a very
good start in 6 months.
>> Okay. What happens if you are elected to
government and you're prime minister and
you find out that you can't find the
savings you want? You're in the process
of rethinking your economic policy. All
kinds of tax cutting plans which are now
having to be rethought. Is that because
they were unworkable?
>> Net zero 30 billion saved. Uh cutbacks
in civil service tens of billions saved.
But of course the big one the big one
and the thing that I've got to think out
far more fully
is the whole explosion
of PIP of disability payments
>> and you are in the midst of having
serious single. But what what I want to
ask you is that you people said about
your plans to spend and to tax cuts that
they were unworkable and they were
fantasy economics and the fact that
you're having to rethink them suggests
>> No, I'm not rethinking right. I suspect
what we come back will be will be a lot
more radical than what you saw there.
>> More radical in which way? More
>> Well, well, as I said to you before I
came and did this, I'm going to be
laying out some economic stuff between
now and the budget in terms of speeches.
Um what is for certain I tell you what
is for certain with the economy and we
touched on this run at the beginning. We
touched on this place in the 80s but we
could go more broadly across the country
in the 80s. There was an attitudinal
change towards work towards having a go
towards risk which I'm pro. I'm very
pro- risk. I'm very pro individuals
taking risk. I don't believe we should
protect people from themselves. We
should allow them to go out and have a
go. We need an attitudal change towards
success, towards money, towards
business, towards tax and incentives.
And and this is stuff
that you can't necessarily write in a
manifesto.
>> Well, you're going to have to though,
aren't you?
>> No, you can't. You can't. Attitudal
stuff you can't you cannot write.
>> What was called a contract, and there
are promises in it that don't stand
anymore.
>> You've been at the BBC all your life. I
don't think you understand what I'm
saying. I'm talking about attitudinal
change within society. You can't put any
of that in manifestos. It's about a
buzz. It's about a vibe. It's about how
a country feels. And and you know, one
of the reasons, and you know, you played
that tape to me earlier.
>> You know what is interesting about
Trump's America, and there are bits of
it you can dislike or like or whatever.
What is interesting about Trump's
America is a lot more people in America
are having a go. They're setting up
companies. They're borrowing money.
They're taking risk. We need to get to
that place. And and and as I say, you
can't put it in a piece of paper. And
the one thing I'm certain of,
>> you're gonna have to inspire people,
aren't you?
>> That's right. That's exactly right.
>> Which takes me back to where I started
that. Are you going to be someone who
brings people together because you're
known for turning the fire on people.
You're not known for being someone who
>> appeals right across the country, has a
common message, everyone can get.
>> Fair. I think you know,
>> so give me an inspirational message.
What what is great about Britain today?
>> Even in my time even in my time in the
European Parliament where perhaps I
achieved some level of infamy. Um was I
turning my fire on people? No, I was
just teasing them. I was just teasing
them. They were turning their fire on
me. I mean, we just had a party
conference season where the levels of
insightful abuse that have come from
Star and his cabinet are off the scale.
I've never behaved like that. Not with
anybody. I might have strong opinions. I
might express what I believe in
strongly, what I'm against very
strongly. I don't think if you look
through my my political career that you
will find personal invective, you'll
find teasing and not much more than
that. We have to we have to have a vibe,
a buzz that says to young people,
setting up businesses, taking risk, even
having failures, even having failures
along the way is a good thing, not a bad
thing. And you know something, I might
succeed. I might fail. I accept that.
>> Yeah. But if but I'm going to have a go.
>> If you don't succeed as prime minister,
it's not the same as your personal
success. That's about the fortunes of
the country that are riding on that. So
you're going to need more than a vibe.
>> Well, I think the two are the same
thing. We're in that much trouble. We're
in that much trouble.
>> Well, you as you as one man and the vibe
you create.
>> It's not just me. There's a whole
movement here now. There's a whole
movement here now. And you've seen over
and I'm sitting talking to I don't do
many interviews these days. I I I allow
others to go and do it. And there's a
much broader range of talent, you know,
that has that has come on the scene for
the party. We're building a mass
membership very rapidly. You see, I know
you're a risk taker, but I think the
moment of real risk that exists for your
party right now is that you've had this
sustained period where you've been
rising in the opinion polls while you've
been making big promises on spending, on
big tax cuts, and now you're at a point
where you're having to rethink your
economic policy. And it's it's probably
going to be much more likely we're going
to make bigger promises.
>> We're going to make even bigger
promises.
>> That's not the signals that that your
people in your party are setting out.
They're saying you're going to have a
fully costed manifesto,
>> a full rethink facing the same realities
that other parties do.
>> Well, look, we're in government. Maybe
you're not special.
>> We're in government now. We're in
government now in the local government.
You know, we we're going to do our
damnedest to be in government in Wales
next May. We may or may not succeed, but
we're going to do our damnedest and
we'll have to be judged by what we do. I
accept that. So, is Donald Trump a role
model for you for government?
>> In terms of
standing up for the national interest
above all else,
yes.
In terms of keeping promises that he
made to the electorate, yes, there are
many other areas in which we might
disagree or might do things.
>> Which are the areas that you disagree?
>> There are other areas you might
disagree, social policy, etc. We we
might see things differently, but the
the the fundamentalism of Trump is you
tell the electorate, "I'm going to do
X," and you actually do it. And that's
what he's doing. And you know, and we
might look at I mean, look, you know,
you and I could sit over a cup of tea
and talk about some of the tariff
machinations and say to ourselves, what
the hell's going on? Um, and we could,
you know, go back to the 30s and think
about tariffs and damage it's done to
the economy, etc.
>> Do you think he's damaging the American?
It's irrelevant. It's irrelevant. It's
irrelevant. You don't like
>> No, no, no, no, no. Listen to me. It's
irrelevant. He promised the American
public he'd use tariffs as a weapon.
He's doing it. So, he is So, is he to a
large extent restoring faith in a
democratic system? Yes. And we will have
to if we succeed, and there's a long way
to go. As I said to you earlier, we're
halfway through the marathon. If we
succeed, we must do the same because one
of the reasons why reform is doing so
well is there is a complete breakdown of
trust. No one believes a blooming thing
the other parties say. I I think you
could be part of that breakdown of trust
because this document which said our
contract with you. It's a contract with
the voters. It's the document you stood
on last year.
>> I didn't write it. I inherited it to be
fair.
>> You were the party leader standing on
your face. Your face is right there on
the front.
>> I came in after it was published to be
fair and we and we changed the front
page. But look, are the principles right
within it? Yes. Can we
>> Yeah, but there are numbers in it. It's
put forward as a contract breakdown of
trust and you've been part of a
breakdown of trust. Haven't seen back
on. Have you seen what the conservatives
your interview? This is your Hang on a
sec. If you complain about a breakdown
of trust, don't you have to stick to
your promise?
>> I stick to I would like nobody in
Britain to pay income tax until they
earn £20,000 a year.
>> And when do you think you'll be able to
deliver that in government?
>> I will answer that over the course of
the next few weeks. Not today, as I told
you before I came on here. But do I want
to honor that? Yes. Is it realistic
immediately we're in government? No. And
those circumstances have changed. Are
the principles,
aspirations,
and even the numbers that are set out
there wrong? No, they're not. They're
right. But it's all about getting things
in the right order.
>> Okay. Uh Nigel Farish, this is the
Bloomberg weekend interview.
>> I wondered if you get one these days
because you are more in demand than ever
before. [laughter]
According to your team, you're meeting
presidents, prime ministers, and kings
from the Middle East these days.
>> I wouldn't comment on that particularly,
but um
>> are you meeting kings from the Middle
East?
>> I can't remember. And if I did, I
wouldn't tell you. I wouldn't tell you.
I wouldn't do you know why I'm
>> Is this inaccurate that you're meeting
President's prime ministers and kings
from the Middle East?
>> You know what? One of the reasons I've
survived so long in public life is I'm
very discreet. And you know, if I have
private meetings with people, I never
discuss it.
>> It's it's one of your senior supporters
and donors who said this. Well, I don't
know who he is or she is, but um well
well I wouldn't comment on it. All
right. I wouldn't comment on it. Um I
don't comment on things like that and
people trust me because of that. You
know, I keep confidences.
>> But you are in circles you haven't been
in before.
>> That's fair. That's fair. And I mean
that is fair. Yeah. Um I think a lot of
people around the world think we are
going to win the next election just
because they people that you know like
this country see what a mess it's got
itself into. See, it's a long hall
because technically it's not due for
another four years and the current
government has a large majority. Do you
think you can sustain
>> the level of engagement you'd need to to
to still be in this position in four
years time? You're not really known for
you you stuck at the idea of wanting to
be out of the European Union, but you've
had a number of different parties over
the years.
>> I stuck at it more than anybody. I've
been doing this since 1993. Um, did I
finally retire on the 31st of January
2020? Yes, I did. That was it. I was
done with it. I I came back into
politics last year. It was probably the
toughest decision of my life. You know,
I turned 60 last year. Life pretty
settled. Um, some good jobs, a company
being quite successful in a variety of
areas, first couple of grandkids born.
You know, life was pretty good. So, I
knew I was making a big sacrifice coming
back into it. and I'm determined to make
it a success. And I think I've been very
con, you know, we talk about persistent,
but I've generally been pretty
consistent in the kind of values and
views and beliefs that I've had. And I
can I sustain it for four years?
Yep. It's a long haul, but yeah. Uh can
the government sustain it for four
years? I think very unlikely. And I
think, you know, just as you've seen
reform take over the center right of
British politics, I think there's a
massive change on the left about to
come. And I think that I think that the
government will be forced by 27 into a
genuine austerity budget. I mean, a real
austerity budget. Just the markets, you
know, are going to demand that. And I
suspect at that moment the left of
British politics splits in a very very
dramatic way. And I think the growth of
the Greens,
the Corbinites,
the sort of urban left of politics, uh
the the those who vote on Gaza and
religion more than British issues, all
of those things. Um I think they will
struggle to see out 27.
>> That's why you think there'll be a
general election then?
>> I do. Yeah.
>> Okay. I want to know what sustains you.
Is it true you read constantly?
>> I do read a lot. Yeah, I do read a lot.
>> What are you reading at the moment?
>> Um, well, I'm the last book I read was
Mr. Balffor's Poodle, which was about
the constitutional crisis between the
Commons and the Lords because
>> early 20th century.
>> Yeah, the principles are exactly the
same. And by the way, the Ssbury
Convention has been there since 1911.
And so,
>> why are you interested in that?
>> Because say we get elected on a
manifesto to say we're going to do X, Y,
and Zed. What if the House What if the
House of Lords were to block us? What
are the what are the civil service
blockers? These are all the things that
we're thinking and going through at the
moment.
>> You're going back a hundred years to try
and find the answers to that.
>> Principles don't change over centuries.
>> What else are you reading
>> over centuries? Principles don't change.
>> I heard you like poetry.
>> Yeah, like a little bit of poetry. I
wouldn't say hugely. I read I like
biography. I like history. Um my current
book, which I've really barely started,
um is written by the former prime
minister of Armenia. Um and it's about
how small states can survive in the big
wide world. Sarasan is his name who
wrote it.
>> So everything you're reading is kind of
part of your homework if you like for
government. Is that the case? What what
do you do to actually put your head in a
different place?
>> Yeah. I mean I like to go out and walk
um when I get time. I like to fish. I
like a day at the races. I like I like
the odd day at the cricket. Um there are
things I enjoy doing. Um, no. The truth
is, I mean, look, we're living in a we
are living in a 247
uh media environment. Um, I am a
political entrepreneur, even though I'm
trying to shed responsibilities
of the party. For the moment, I'm still
the main entry point for most new people
that want to give money or stand as
candidate. You've always kind of been,
haven't you? Most of my life these days,
believe it or not, is focusing on what's
beneath the bonnet. Focusing on the
structure of the party, focusing on the
funding of the party, focusing on making
sure that across all the regions of the
United Kingdom, we're prepared. And I'll
just sort of say this to you sort of
towards the end that I don't think
anyone's yet really understood. Next
May, May the 6th next year is the
British equivalent of the midterms in
America. These are elections of a
magnitude and a significance that almost
nobody yet understands.
>> To close, I want to go back to where I
began and the kind of person you're
known for and the kind of person you'd
have to be if you're to be a great prime
minister.
>> What would you say to someone who
worries that you might deport their
grandmother or you might not be a leader
for them because they are not white or
they're Muslim? No. What would you say
to them? There are people who think
that.
I would say the questions beneath you,
but I would also say this.
>> If you the only people that call me
racist tend to be called Jakcasta and
have gone to St. Mary's Ascot and be
upper middle class and very snobby.
>> Is that your answer to someone who'd be
worried about you as a prime minister?
What is your message of unity? Do you
have one? Our message for unity is if
you're in this country legally, whether
you've been here for one generation or
150 generations, if you're paying your
taxes, obeying the law, being part of
our community, recognizing there is
commonality between all of us whilst
we're different things that we share.
You're incredibly welcome. But are we
here to be the dumping ground of the
world? Are we here to be the food bank
of the world? Are we here to have
uncontrolled mass illegal immigration
changing our culture, endangering women
on our streets? No. On that, we're going
to get really, really tough. And I think
you'll be very, very surprised how many
people from all different backgrounds of
religions from all over the world
support that message and want that as
the country that they've either been
born into or chosen to live in.
>> Nigel Farage, thank you. Thank you.